>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Now
that we've talked about HTTP,
let's get into how that
bridges into ASP.NET Core.
So ASP.NET Core is a framework built to
respond to those HTTP requests, right?
And it has a lot of tooling to kind of
make your life as a developer easier,
especially if you're programming
against a database of some kind.
So as I mentioned, you're one
command from creating a new ASP.NET
web Core project,
which we'll do here shortly.
This is what the program file looks like.
Let's actually do that real quick and
talk about what we see.
So I'm gonna actually run this,
say ls, see where we are.
I will go to Repos, keep it all contained.
And I will create My .NET new webapi,
MyWebApp.
Let's go ahead and go through
the project structure real quick.
So I'm gonna open this up
in Visual Studio Code.
I'm gonna go to Open Folder,
Repos, and what is this one?
MyWebApp, perfect.
Boom, there it is, okay?
Wanna talk through a couple of
things that we're seeing here.
First of all, you get the typical
folder view of Visual Studio Code.
The C# dev kit extension also adds
this little solution explorer,
which is something that I use as well.
And that will tell you basically,
here's the project structure,
here's the solution, and
here's all the projects in that solution.
So you can see up here that
when you create the application
that you get a csproj file.
And the csproj file is basically kind
of the group of all of the files
that are relevant to this web app.
It comes with a few installed like
Swashbuckle, which we will talk about.
That defines the target framework,
which is .NET 8,
which is the latest
long-term support framework.
It has nullable>enabled,
which we'll get to here shortly,
and it has ImplicitUsings,
which we won't necessarily cover.
These are the NuGet Packages, so
NuGet being the package manager for
.NET, these are the ones that
are installed in the template.
Let's take a look at the Program.cs file.
So there's a little bit of just general
stuff that they think is useful.
When you run this application,
it'll actually open a browser window and
it'll actually show you swagger,
and will allow you to see and
browse the APIs that you have defined.
Down here we see this MapGet right here,
which is the give request that
they give you by default.
So they're telling you here's what
a giver request would look like,
it's a very basic API.
And then this is the part
where actually runs the API.
Let's go ahead and run it real quick,
kind of see what we get.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Okay, so you
can see that a nice little UI comes up,
nice little Swagger UI to tell you,
here's all your API definitions.
In this case, we only have one,
which is the weatherforecast, and
we can if we wanted to, execute this here.
We could also execute it in Postman,
which is what I'm gonna do.
So I'm gonna copy this host.
I'm gonna switch over to Postman,
continue without an account.
Nice try Postman, not doing it.
Weatherforecast.
And you can see down here that our API
has responded with a little bit of data.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: It's all JSON.
It's all JSON data just of random weather.
And if you keep sending it, it just
basically sends you back random data.
So I do wanna show a little
bit of something else.
There's kind of two major
sections to the program file.
There's the builder part where
the app is being actually kind of
configured and built.
So this is where you register
all your services and
your dependency injection container.
These are all the things that
are available for the application to use.
And we'll get into that a little
more detail as we go forward.
And then from there,
after your app is actually built,
you'll see that you have
these calls to Use.
What is Use?
So Use is basically telling
something inside of ASP.NET to
say there's middleware, right?
And so those middleware
are basically just building blocks.
So, think of it like a pipeline,
water flows through a pipe.
Our HTTP request is actually
flowing through a pipe as well.
And you can think of middleware
as sections of that pipe.
So for instance, it says if this
environment is development,
which we're running it locally, so
it's properly saying that this is
indeed a development environment.
So it says, hey, I want you to add Swagger
and I want you to add the Swagger UI
to the middleware pipeline so
that way it can be accessible.
Order really matters in middleware,
which we will demonstrate here shortly.
This is a middleware that says redirect
to HTTPS if you should so choose.
And then this is where we actually add our
get endpoint to our middleware call or
middleware pipeline to say, okay,
I want you to be able to handle
requests that look like this.
In this case, we wanna be able to handle
get requests where the resource that
they're requesting is weatherforecast.
And then this is actually where we
actually go in and run the app.
To kind of introduce a problem and
to show you that middleware is always
in control, we're gonna go here, and
we are gonna scroll down to our,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Code there,
and we're gonna paste this in.
So middleware has a property
where it doesn't have to
execute the next middleware.
If it thinks that it can handle a request,
it's gonna handle that request and
simply return.
So we're actually gonna put at
the top of our middleware pipeline,
we're actually gonna write something to
the client, which we'll do here quickly.
And you'll see that now
everything else is skipped.
And what's that doing?
What does that mean?
Well, first of all,
we're actually adding in some headers.
We're appending some
headers to our request.
And then we are writing this Response,
Welcome to Ahoy,
and we're not going to the next
phase of the middleware pipeline.
And the reason that we're not doing
that is we've now been instructed our
middleware to execute.
So look at this thing right here.
So this app.Use has a specific signature.
It has an HTTP context, so this is where
you could get your request, your response.
You can write directly to the response,
you can read request headers, you can
understand the user context for the person
who's actually asking for the request.
And then you see this thing
called a RequestDelegate.
So this request delegate is actually
a pointer to the next phase
in the middleware pipe.
So if we shortcut all of this to say,
await next.
See, pass it the context.
Cool thing about middleware, you don't
even have to pass it the HttpContext.
You can fool the next middleware.
Give it a completely different
HttpContext if you want,
not something I do, but it is possible.
Now we've instructed this middleware
instead of actually handling this request,
actually just go to the next
phase in the pipeline.
And now we get what we expect.
This is telling this next call is now
telling let's go down to this next
middleware, in this case,
we've defined it as UseSwagger.
A little bit about HttpContext.
HttpContext has quite a few
helpful properties that are really
important to understand.
Request is, of course,
the incoming request.
It'll tell you, like I said,
the request headers,
the content of the request,
you can read them.
A lot of times we're kind of
handling it in a raw sense, but
once we get further down into ASP.NET
Core, we'll see how it can automatically
handle some of parts of this request and
make it very convenient for us.
We have the response object here where we
can write to the response if we so choose.
We have an items dictionary
where we can say
middleware might interpret a part of the
request and say, hey, I think that other
middleware down the pipe might need
this item to continue executing.
So you can add items and
remove items as necessary,
which we'll show a brief example of later.
We can see the user that's coming in.
So if we go down here,
you can see context.User.Identity
to actually get the username of the person
that's actually making the request.
And then there's features of
request which you can think of them
as tiny little middleware,
but they're really more like,
I wanna handle a request in
a particular way, or I wanna have this
particular behavior that executes as
part of responding to the request.
So now that we've talked about middleware,
and
kind of talked about
the importance of middleware in
the ASP.NET Core execution pipeline,
continue down and
see that as long as we have given
the okay back to the middleware
to actually execute the next thing
that it will actually do so.
And it'll continue down this pipe until
it finds something that it can execute.
So, if we go here and put a breakpoint,
I'm gonna go ahead and do that.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And you'll
see that this middleware only gets hit,
I'm refreshing,
this middleware will only get hit if it's
a request that it can think it can handle.
So if we have weatherforecasts,
we're not gonna actually get anything.
We're actually gonna get a 404.
The server's gonna say no middleware was
actually able to handle this request.
But if we go to weatherforecasts,
you'll see that once we hit it,
we'll actually hit that break point,
and actually you'll see that this says,
yes, I can handle this request.